If the young Talib bodyguard had known that making the cellphone call would kill him, he would not have done it. But he did not know, so he did and it did. 
On 7 July 2005 four suicide bombers let off their haversack bombs in Central London. They killed fifty-two commuters and injured about seven hundred, leaving at least one hundred crippled for life. 
Three of the four were British born and raised but of Pakistani immigrant parentage. The fourth was a Jamaican by birth, British by naturalization and had converted to Islam. He and one other were still teenagers; the third was twenty-two and the group leader thirty. All had been radicalized, or brainwashed into extreme fanaticism, not abroad but right in the heart of England after attending extremist mosques and listening to similar preachers. 
Within twenty-four hours of the explosion they had been identified and traced to various residences in and around the northern city of Leeds; indeed all had spoken with varying strengths of Yorkshire accent. The leader was a special-needs teacher called Mohammad Siddique Khan. 
During the scouring of their homes and possessions the police discovered a small treasure trove that they chose not to reveal. There were four receipts showing that one of the senior two had bought cellphones of the buy-use-and-throw variety, tri-band versions usable almost anywhere in the world, and each containing a pre-paid SIM card worth about twenty pounds sterling. The phones had all been bought for cash and all were missing. But the police traced their numbers and ‘red-flagged’ them all in case they ever came on stream. 
It was also discovered that Siddique Khan and his closest intimate in the group, a young Punjabi called Shehzad Tanweer, had visited Pakistan the previous November and spent three months there. No trace was found of whom they had seen but weeks after the explosions the Arab TV station Al-Jazeera broadcast a defiant video made by Siddique Khan as he planned his death and it was clear this video had been made during that visit to Islamabad. 
It was not until September 2006 that it also became clear that one of the bombers took one of the ‘lily-white’ untraceable cellphones with him and presented it to his Al-Qaeda organizer/instructor. (The British police had already established that none of the bombers had the technical skill to create the bombs themselves without instruction and help.) 
Whoever this AQ high-up was, he seems to have passed on the gift as a token of respect to a member of the elite inner committee grouped around the person of Osama bin Laden in his invisible hideaway in the bleak mountains of South Waziristan that run along the Pakistani/Afghan border west of Peshawar. It would have been given for emergency purposes only, because all AQ operatives are extremely wary of cellphones, but the donor could not have known at the time that the British fanatic would be stupid enough to leave the receipt lying around his desk in Leeds. 
There are four divisions to Bin Laden’s inner committee. They deal with operations, financing, propaganda and doctrine. Each branch has a chieftain and only Bin Laden and his co-leader Ayman al-Zawahiri outrank them. By September 2006 the chief organizer of finance for the entire terror group was Zawahiri’s fellow Egyptian Tewfik al-Qur. 
For reasons which became plain later, he was under deep disguise in the Pakistani city of Peshawar on 15 September, not departing on an extensive and dangerous tour outside the mountain redoubt, but returning from one. He was waiting for the arrival of the guide who would take him back into the Waziri peaks and into the presence of the Sheikh himself. 
To protect him in his brief stay in Peshawar he had been assigned four local zealots belonging to the Taliban movement. As befits men who originate in the North-western Mountains, the chain of fierce tribal districts that runs along this ungovernable frontier, they were technically Pakistanis but tribally Waziris. They spoke Pashto rather than Urdu and their loyalties were to the Pashtun people of whom the Waziris are a sub-branch. 
All were raised from the gutter in a madrassah or Koranic boarding school of extreme orientation, adhering to the Wahhabi sect of Islam, the harshest and most intolerant of all. They had no knowledge of, or skill in, anything other than reciting the Koran and were thus, like teeming millions of madrassah-raised youths, virtually unemployable. But given a task to do by their clan chief, they would die for it. That September they had been charged with protecting the middle-aged Egyptian who spoke Nilotic Arabic but had enough Pashto to get by. One of the four youths was Abdelahi and his pride and joy was his cellphone. Unfortunately its battery was flat because he had forgotten to recharge it.
