 NEW DELHI, JAN 26 The Indian Republic turned 50 today with a celebration that sought to encapsule the achievements of a young nation while providing an insight into what the future holds in store for the world's largest democracy. Showcased on Rajpath here this morning was the military might of a culturally diverse country rooted to its social commitment and holding out a promise of a better tomorrow.

Coming as this Republic Day did after a year that put India's defence preparedness to test in the Kargil heights, Operation Vijay was a recurrent theme at the parade that also marked the 50th year of adoption of the Indian Constitution.

Leading the nation into another milestone in time was the President and Supreme Commander of the Defence Forces, Mr. K. R. Narayanan, who reached the venue at the designated hour along with the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, chief guest at this year's Republic Day celebrations.

Though the 51st Republic Day parade was a victory celebration of sorts, it was not without its sombre moments. Before the parade began in right earnest, the nation saluted the valiant soldiers who displayed exemplary courage as the President presented the four Param Vir Chakras and the sole Ashok Chakra.

Silence prevailed as the fathers of Capt. Vikram Batra and Lt. Manoj Kumar Pandey went up to accept the highest wartime bravery award from Mr. Narayanan. While the mood lifted a bit as a toast to the bravery of Grenadier Yogender Singh Yadav and Rifleman Sanjay Kumar when they marched up to the President to be pinned with the PVCs, a heavy silence descended on the gathering when the father of Major Sudhir Kumar went up to collect the Ashok Chakra awarded to his son posthumously.

Even as Major Sudhir Kumar's father was walking away from the enclosure, a roar of helicopters in the distant skies indicated the beginning of the parade. On display for the next two hours was the will of a nation determined to brave all odds.

Led by the General Officer Commanding of Delhi Area, Major General Surinder Kumar Awasthy, the parade began with two Mounted Contingents which made way for the Mechanised Columns. No doubt, the Main Battle Tank Arjun, T-72 tanks and the Prithvi missile - billed as the country's tactical `Brahmastra' - came as a reassuring sight, but the Snow Mobiles and the Mine Protected Vehicle stole the march by virtue of being on display for the first time in the parade.

After the mechanised columns thundered down Rajpath, it was the turn of the men behind the machines. While the elite paratroopers and para-commandos of the Army made their maiden appearance, cadets of the Indian Military Academy, Dehra Dun, returned to this annual show of strength after 37 years.

In step with their heads held high, contingents drawn from the three Services marched past the President to the tune of martial bands that swayed behind them. A particularly impressive lot were the Marine Commandos who participated in the parade for the first time. Punctuating the march-past were prized possessions of the Indian Navy - INS Mysore and INS Brahmaputra - and the Air Force Vehicular Column which included an MI-17 helicopter, MiG-21, MiG- 27 and Mirage-2000 planes.

Giving the men from the Defence Forces a run for their money were the marching contingents of personnel from the para- military forces. Dressed in bright uniforms, they lent a dash of colour to the show that till then was dominated by the Forces. Though a permanent fixture of this part of the show, the Camel Contingent of the Border Security Force did not fail to please the eye.

An hour into the first Republic Day Parade of the new millennium and it was time for the other India to take over: The India that lives in its villages and cities. With a series of tableaux acting as show-windows, several vignettes of India were displayed. Apart from showcasing the country's rich heritage, the tableaux represented the developments made by a vibrant nation with a vision for the future.

Then the ``Generation Next'' took over. Heralded by the brave children atop caprisoned elephants, this segment - brimming as it was with the kind of unbridled enthusiasm only children possess - served as a harbinger of times to come with kids dancing to tunes both old and new.

Keeping the best for the last, the parade signed off with an impressive fly-past. Designed to bring up the rear, the ``Vertical Charlie'' executed by Sqn. Ldr. Nirmal Singh Jamwal articulated the aspirations of a nation keen to soar high in a millennium that belongs to Asia. 
