NEW DELHI , JAN 26 The Indian Republic turned 50 today with a celebration that sought to encapsule the achievements of a young nation while providing an insight into what the future holds in store for the world 's largest democracy.
Coming as this Republic Day did after a year that put India 's defence preparedness to test in the Kargil heights , Operation Vijay was a recurrent theme at the parade that also marked the 50th year of adoption of the Indian Constitution.
Leading the nation into another milestone in time was the President and Supreme Commander of the Defence Forces , Mr. K. R. Narayanan , who reached the venue at the designated hour along with the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria , Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo , chief guest at this year 's Republic Day celebrations.
Before the parade began in right earnest , the nation saluted the valiant soldiers who displayed exemplary courage as the President presented the four Param Vir Chakras and the sole Ashok Chakra.
While the mood lifted a bit as a toast to the bravery of Grenadier Yogender Singh Yadav and Rifleman Sanjay Kumar when they marched up to the President to be pinned with the PVCs , a heavy silence descended on the gathering when the father of Major Sudhir Kumar went up to collect the Ashok Chakra awarded to his son posthumously.
Even as Major Sudhir Kumar 's father was walking away from the enclosure , a roar of helicopters in the distant skies indicated the beginning of the parade.
Led by the General Officer Commanding of Delhi Area , Major General Surinder Kumar Awasthy , the parade began with two Mounted Contingents which made way for the Mechanised Columns.
No doubt , the Main Battle Tank Arjun , T-72 tanks and the Prithvi missile - billed as the country 's tactical `Brahmastra ' - came as a reassuring sight , but the Snow Mobiles and the Mine Protected Vehicle stole the march by virtue of being on display for the first time in the parade.
While the elite paratroopers and para-commandos of the Army made their maiden appearance , cadets of the Indian Military Academy , Dehra Dun , returned to this annual show of strength after 37 years.
Apart from showcasing the country 's rich heritage , the tableaux represented the developments made by a vibrant nation with a vision for the future.
Monstrous ready-for-battle artillery , perfectly synchronised marching contingents , familiar sounds and scenes from far-off places , pride , colour and lots of sunshine marked the 64th Republic Day parade at the majestic Rajpath here on Saturday.
As is the custom , Prime Minister Manmohan Singh paid tributes to the immortal soldiers or Amar Jawan Jyoti at the India Gate before the start of the parade.
The Air Forces marching contingent was led by a lady , Flight Lieutenant Heena Pore , eliciting admiring whistles and claps.
The Defence Research and Development Organisations equipment columns with the over 5,000 km ballistic Agni V missile mounted on a road mobile launcher was another major attraction.
The tune of the accompanying BSF camel-mounted band was almost drowned out by the tinkle of the camels bells and the shouts of the audience as they watched the mustachioed men atop the graceful camels stare straight ahead , big guns in hand.
The Delhi Police band playing the so-familiar , Delhi Police , met with instant approval from the citys denizens , even as the girls NCC band , dressed in red and black checked skirts , white boots and feathered hats drew loud cheers.
